Friska
Gender: Female
Living in: Suaq, Sumatra
Age: 60+
Family tribe: Friska family, also known as “Frizzy hair” family
Status: 
dominate female in her tribe, one of the oldest and most respected females in Suaq
at her older age now, she is enjoying a slower pace of life, reflecting a well-deserved rest from her years of active motherhood and leadership
6 children, 3 grandchildren, 4 great grandchildren and 2 great great grandchildren
Personality: Brave, strong-minded, fearless, assertive, territorial, protective, more mellow now as she aged, enjoys solitude (often found alone), exemplary mother, strict parenting mother
Health: fit, robust
Stories: 
her son Fredy would assist her in ambushing and driving other males deep into the forest. 
Friska has been know to chase other orangutans (male or females) from feeding trees or nests to claim the best spots for herself
other orangutans are still quite scare of her (to keep distance), even she is older now, due to her reputation
successfully raised 6 children, highest number in Suaq
Her parenting style is strict yet effective, characterized by allowing her infants to cry more and yielding to their demands less frequently compared to other mothers. This tough love approach appears to prepare her children well for the challenges of life in the wild, even if it means they receive less overt affection. 
Friska family tree
Son: Fredy, Henky, Frankie (2012) 
Daughter: Ellie (1998), Halte, Herdi
Grandson: Emen (2022, son of Ellie), 
Granddaughter: Raffi (daughter of Halte), Eden (2014, daughter of Ellie)
Great grandson: Rendang (son of Raffi), Tedy (son of Halte), 
Great granddaughter: Beti (daughter of Raffi), Ronaldo (son of Raffi)
Great great granddaughter: Taylor (daughter of tina), Tina (daughter of Raffi)
Ellie (daughter)
Born 1998
Likes to go to bed late and love eating at evening
large belly and frowning face mark
Mother of Eden (female) and Emen (male)
Ellie and Emen and Eden continue to reside in the central part of the Suaq study area
Stories: 
moody teenage years, Ellie made her presence known by noisily navigating through the forest, breaking branches and trees on her way through. On rainy mornings, she was notorious for dismantling her night nests or even destroying her nesting trees.
She liked to play with her younger brother Fredy during the early years
Ellie spent most of her juvenile years in the company of a group of other juvenile girls
Ellie’s evenings were spent feasting in large feeding trees, often going to bed late and becoming quite chubby, especially during fruitful seasons. 
Frankie (Son)
Born 2012
Youngest son of Friska
Bold and fierce
Prominent figure in Suaq orangutan community
Close bond with his brother Fredy
Good friend with his niece, Eden
Independent
Stories:
rough-and-tumble play. These playful sessions helped Frankie develop his physical strength and social skills
Friska, recognizing Frankie’s social needs, often left him with other mothers, providing ample opportunities for him to interact with his peers while she attended to her own activities. This independence fostered Frankie’s growth and adaptability.
He often took on responsibilities beyond his years, such as assisting Friska in building their night nests. This early sense of duty may stem from an innate understanding of his mother’s age and the need for him to mature quickly. 
Friska’s experienced parenting, though seemingly tough, provided Frankie with the necessary skills and resilience to navigate the challenges of his environment.
Eden (Grand daughter)
Born 2014
First child of Ellie
Distinct unicorn hair style
Brave, curious, adventurous
Determined, stubborn and fearless
Sociable, many friends of her age
Stories about Eden:
Eden’s fearless nature extends to her interactions with new orangutans and the researchers who observe her. Often, she appears to study the researchers just as intently as they study her, reflecting her innate curiosity.
Emen (Grandson)
Born 2020
son of Ellie
Love spending time with his mother
Playful

Suaq forest orangutan communities

Cissy family
The Cissy family lives in the Northern half of the Suaq study area. Cissy, the oldest female of the family has 4 daughters.
The Cissy family strikes us as especially intelligent. Cissy, her daughters and her grandchildren show the most sophisticated and varied behavior of all orangutans. They, for example, use tools more often and more flexibly than the others.
At the same time, Cissy and her kin are incredibly sociable and like to hang out together. They also often associate with members of other families or males. This gives the kids of the Cissy family the opportunity to learn from a broad variety of role models.
Especially the females of the Cissy family have exceptionally long and straight hair, which is why in the field we refer to them as the “pretty hair” family.

Cissy

Cissy is one of the older females at Suaq, the mother of four daughters and matriarch to the “pretty hair” matriline. Unfortunately, we haven’t seen Cissy since 2021, but we are still hopeful that she may be still around. As with her other three daughters, Cissy is a patient mother and an amazing role model, currently passing her vast skill repertoires on to Cinnamon.
Despite her age, Cissy is still very explorative and curious. She shows the largest tool use repertoire of all the orangutans at Suaq and an unmatched variety of other feeding techniques. Cissy also has the broadest diet of all the females at Suaq. In other words, Cissy knows best about what to eat when and where. She seems to have an amazing memory of the different fruit trees and lianas growing at Suaq throughout the forest. Cissy is gentle and kind to all the other females and their kids and seems always relaxed despite what happens around her.
Given her good nature, expertise and vast knowledge, it is not surprising that her daughters and granddaughters all like to spend time with her. Cissy always lets them feed and rest closely together, and the whole family often travels as a small group for many days in a row. Cissy also tolerates unrelated females nearby, such as Ellie or Raffi. During these party days (days in association with other orangutans), the moms will peacefully feed together while their kids play.
Especially when her daughters are getting to an age where they are interested in males, Cissy also lets young males join her travel party. This way, Cissy seems to be able to keep a watchful eye on her daughters and their new exciting friends. Cissy lets the males hang out with them as long as they behave. She is also known for her own friendships with certain unflanged males of whom she spends a lot of time in close and relaxed association. She will sometimes even share her nest with those males and her older infants.
However, when she she has had enough of her association partners, Cissy also knows many tricks to get her peace and quiet. She is an expert in sneaking off when she wants to avoid certain individuals like obtrusive males. She will make a day nest and seemingly rest in it for some time until the others have made nests as well. Cissy will then suddenly dart out of her nest, first running off quickly, then once out of sight, quietly hiding in a dense tree. As soon as the confused males have passed her, Cissy will leave her hiding place and quietly move in the opposite direction. She has also used that trick to get rid of us observers, even though most days she is totally fine with us following her.
Cissy is a highly tolerant and sociable, gentle old lady and surprises us constantly with her knowledge and many tricks. When following her, we are always excited to see what she will surprise us with next.
Leon

Leon was Lisa’s third child and born in November 2018.
When Leon was born, we were a bit surprised by his looks. Even though he was exceptionally cute with a lot of orange hair, Leon’s head and facial expression looked a bit off. Something else we noticed was that Leon seemed to have difficulty holding onto Lisa: he often had his arms stretched and was dangling from Lisa a lot, as if he was too weak to remain in the proper baby clinging position. Whereas orangutan infants usually start trying to leave their mothers at around the age of 6 months by pulling at the surrounding vegetation, we did not observe any of these attempts by Leon. We also had the feeling that Leon struggled to crawl across Lisa’s body to reach her nipples and only saw him suckle on rare occasions. All in all, these observations suggest that Leon could have been developmentally delayed. We saw Lisa supporting Leon by holding him and frequently readjusting his position on her. Having such a patient and caring mother definitely helped Leon to deal with his limitations.
Sadly, in August 2019, 7 weeks after they had been seen last, we found Lisa without Leon. Because orangutan babies at this age cannot survive without their mothers, we have to conclude that Leon died. We will probably never know what happened to Leon, but based on our observations it is possible that Leon was suffering from a congenital condition that did not allow him to grow up.
Lisa

Lisa is a daughter of Cissy, estimated to have been born in 1988. Lisa has been followed since she was an infant and since then we have seen her grow up into a beautiful adult female. Lisa has three kids: Lilly, a young adult female, Lois, a young juvenile boy and Leon an infant boy.
Like her mother, Lisa is extremely explorative and innovative. No other orangutan at Suaq uses tools as often and as flexibly as Lisa does. For any tricky foraging situation, like for example getting bugs out of tree holes or smashing open insect nests, Lisa knows what tools work best. The orangutans at Suaq seem to realize that Lisa is a master of tool use and often eagerly come close to watch when Lisa is using tools. Lisa does not seem to mind this attention and lets her spectators watch. But being an orangutan, her tolerance has certain clearly defined boundaries: she only shares her yields with her kids.
Lisa is one of the most well-habituated females at Suaq. She is very at ease with researchers observing her and basically ignores us the entire day. Sometimes, we even have to move out of her way so we are not too close to her. Lisa has been the starring character in many documentaries that have been filmed at Suaq. Lisa does not seem to mind the camera at all. While filming the last documentary, Lisa was trying to avoid a bunch of males who had been harassing her for many days. She soon realized that even though she was not scared of the camera, the males were. To the delight of the filmmakers, she then spent a lot of time directly above the camera seemingly aware that this would keep her harassers away.
Even after she became a mother, Lisa continued to associate often with her own mother, Cissy. Lisa and Cissy, with their dependent offspring Leon, Lois and Cinnamon, are then often joined by their older daughters, Lilly and Chindy, and their young infants as well. All nine travel, feed and sleep close to each other as one big peaceful family for many consecutive days. Lisa seems to know that she can still learn a lot from her mother and continues following Cissy through the forest. Cissy and Lisa will often take turns when looking after their infants, allowing one of them to feed while the other one rests in a day nest watching the kids play. Eventually, they will switch roles or even share their nests for a short time.
Lisa is a very caring, but also a very relaxed mother. Lois, her 8 year old son is still in constant association with Lisa and she continues taking care of him while also letting him go on his own excursions. After Lisa gave birth to Leon, Lois was always allowed to be close by and share the nest with his mother and new baby brother. Being an already experienced mother, Lisa seemed to always know what her baby’s needs were. We would watch her grooming and examining Leon frequently and as with her other kids, it reminded us how gentle and caring she is.
Lisa was last seen with Leon in June 2019. When we found her again in August, Leon was not with her anymore. Lois however, is still remaining with his mother. Lisa and Lois seem stressed and Lisa seems especially haggard, but we couldn’t see any injuries on either of them. 
Chindy

Chindy is the third daughter of Cissy, estimated to be born in 2002/3. We have followed Chindy since she was four years old.
As an infant of a very sociable mother, Chindy had many childhood friends. She spent by far the most time with Lilly, who is the first infant of Chindy’s older sister Lisa. Being a first-time mother, Lisa spent a lot of time with her mother Cissy. Chindy and Lilly were born only around 18 months apart, so it was not surprising that they did everything together.
Chindy was with her mother Cissy until she was 9 years old and visited Cissy regularly after her younger sister Cinnamon arrived. Cissy was always very tolerant with Chindy and allowed her juvenile daughter to share her nest. On some occasions they even had unflanged male guests spend the night in Cissy’s nest which did not seem to bother anyone.
During her juvenile years, we often saw Chindy moving back and forth between a group of juvenile girls and her mother Cissy. The other juvenile girls were somewhat older than Chindy and it always looked like Chindy was a bit lost but did her best to fit in. Luckily, Chindy had Lilly, who was a central member of the group, to help her catch up. As a young juvenile, Chindy also spent a lot of time with unflanged males who tolerated her close association and seemed to enjoy just hanging out with her. Often, those males turned out to be friends of Chindy’s mother, Cissy.
When she was still ranging with the juvenile girls, Chindy was venturing all over the place and could be found anywhere in the Suaq area. But as she got older, Chindy moved more and more north untilfinally settling in the very north and across the border of the study area. Since 2015 we only see her sporadically and we noticed that Chindy became more and more interested in adult males.
Lois

Lois is the second child of Lisa and was born in August 2010. From a very young age, he was curious and showed the highest rates of explorative behaviors of all the Suaq infants. Lois is very interested in what individuals around him do and he spends a lot of time observing them closely.
Lois was born 2 years before the big baby boom at Suaq in 2012. Consequently, he was the oldest of a cohort of infants. Lois always loved to play, especially with his aunt Cinnamon who is 2 years younger than him. Cinnamon was also very fond of Lois and their play behavior always seemed very sweet and trusting. Cinnamon’s mother Cissy was totally fine with Lois playing with her daughter, however, the other mothers were more reserved. To the big disappointment of Lois, they often pull their infants in close when they see Lois approaching fast and enthusiastically from afar.
During his early years, Lois liked to play with his older sister Lilly, but unfortunately for Lois, Lilly was becoming interested in the more “grown up” boys and ignored her little brother more and more. However, instead of giving up on finding play partners, Lois started to play with fully grown males, which he still does now! Because the males mostly ignore Lois, he has to put a lot of effort into getting them to play with him. Lois sometimes even follows the males into their nests or keeps on pulling their legs and arms when they don’t accept his play invitations right away. Lisa lets him do this, but always stays close by keeping an eye on her cheeky son. The males never seem to dare to chase Lois away, probably because Lisa is always close by. When Lois harasses the males too much, the males usually give in and play with him for a bit.
Lois has always shown a fascination for sun and rain hats! He started practicing making his own when he was three years old by putting various kinds of leaves on his head. Lois perfected the skill over several years and now skillfully assembles elaborate hats when it the sun is too strong or when it starts raining. His hats seem to do pretty well in the rain and Lois can continue moving around and the hats will stay on his head. Only when the rain gets too heavy will Lois seek shelter under Lisa’s roof and huddle close to her.
The biggest change so far in the Life of Lois happened in November 2019, when his younger brother Leon was born. Becoming an older sibling is an important milestone in a young orangutan’s life because it marks the completion of weaning and the end of infancy. Lisa now has much less time and energy to devote to Lois which means that he has to be more independent. Being a tolerant and caring mother, Lisa still allows Lois to stay with her: she lets him travel and feed with her and also allows him to sleep in her nest when he wants to. From the start, Lisa seemed very busy with Leon. Instead of interacting with Leon, we saw Lois keeping his distance. This was surprising for us to see because Lois is usually such a social guy. Maybe Lois keeping his distance was related to the fact that Leon was not developing as expected and seemed to need Lisa’s full attention and support.
Sadly, Leon passed away between mid-June and early August 2019 for reasons unknown. Lois is still with Lisa, but currently, both seem quite worn out and low on energy. Lois travels with his mom and stays with her but keeps his distance and hardly ever tries to interact. 

In 2018, we found Chindy with her first infant, a tiny little boy whom we called Chips. Not surprisingly, we now often see Chindy together with her childhood friend Lilly. Chindy and Lilly are now both moms and have returned to their old routine of doing things together. They often drop their little boys in each other’s day nests: while one mom stays with the kids, the other one can go feed and enjoy her peace and quiet for a bit. The babysitting mom in the nest must remained very focused: the boys are often so excited to get to play with each other that they seem to overestimate their abilities. The hardest part for the babysitting mom is to make sure that Luther does not entice Chips out of the nest.
Chips

Chips is Chindy’s first infant and was born in November 2017. Nowadays, Chindy lives far up North of the Suaq study area, so we get to see Chips very rarely.
Chips’ mom Chindy has grown up being very close with her aunt Lilly: they are almost the same age and during their childhood, their mothers Cissy and Lisa spent long periods of time in close association. Lilly is 1 -2 years older than Chindy and gave birth to her first baby Luther about 18 months before Chips was born. When Chindy became a mother herself, she would visit her childhood friend. We would see Chindy dropping off baby Chips with Lilly and then go feed on her own. This was remarkable because Chips was barely at an age where he could be away from his mother. Lilly would make a nest where Chips was totally safe. It almost seemed as if Lilly had realized – maybe based on her own experiences- that because Chindy was a first-time mother to a young baby, she was exhausted and needed some time to recharge. The mothers would take turns with who would stay in the nest with the kids and who would go off to feed.
All of this happened to the great delight of Chips and Luther who loved to play with each other in the nests. However, being older, Luther pulled many stunts that Chips could not keep up with. Luther repeatedly tried to lure Chips out of the nest by tempting him to follow him or even by trying to pull him out. Even though Chips seemed very intrigued, this was always immediately interrupted by their watchful mothers. Luther eventually became more gentle and adjusted to Chips skill levels.
Chips still has a lot to learn. He still spends most of his time on his mother’s body, but soon he will spend more time off, exploring his surroundings. We hope that we will get to see more of Chips soon.
Cinnamon

Cinnamon is Cissy’s youngest daughter, born in April 2012. Being the daughter of probably the most knowledgeable and intelligent female at Suaq, it is not surprising that Cinnamon is also very inquisitive and ahead of other kids her age in terms of skill development.
Cinnamon already knows how to process the vast majority of the fruits at Suaq and also knows when and where to find those fruits better and better each day: we often see her she traveling ahead of her mother Cissy, efficiently leading them from one fruit tree to the next. Cinnamon is very well behaved and knows when it is time to give the lead back to her mother. She will faithfully follow Cissy, but occasionally take small detours to pick up some extra goodies on the way.
At a very young age, Cinnamon started her first solo tool use attempts. Contrary to other young kids who temporarily give up on tool use after a few failed attempts, Cinnamon is very persistent and it looks like she was getting more and more fascinated by it. During her tool use practice sessions, Cinnamon often goes to closely watch her mother so that she can see how it is properly used. She is now getting more proficient at tool use faster than we usually observe it in other kids. Cinnamon is also very skilled at nest building. In the evenings she will build her own nest right next to Cissy’s nest but eventually, she switches to Cissy’s nest and spends the night with her mom.
Because Cissy is so sociable, from the very start, Cinnamon has almost constantly been surrounded by play partners. This includes not only her close relatives, such as Lois, but also the kids of unrelated females who like to hang out with Cissy. Among Cinnamon’s most frequent association partners is little Frankie who gets dropped off by his mother in Cissy’s travel parties frequently. Frankie is almost the same age as Cinnamon and it is, therefore, no wonder that the two have a special connection. Cinnamon seems to be the favorite play partner to most of the kids at Suaq: as soon as Cinnamon is nearby, the other kids try to get close and play with her.
When multiple kids are playing together, it is always Cinnamon who is looking out for the younger ones. When playing with younger kids, Cinnamon is very caring and makes sure that her junior play partners are doing well and don’t get harmed in the heat of the moment.  She even helps them cross tree gaps when the playgroup moves. She sometimes will wait with younger kids who are left behind just until their moms have arrived to pick them up. All this makes us think that Cinnamon has the potential to take over her mother’s role as the wise leader at Suaq, once the time has come.
In 2020, Cinnamon started playing less and eating more than usual and was suddenly growing in all dimensions. It made sense for Cinnamon to grow and build up her reserves as much as possible while she still had the full support of her mother. Since 2021, we have been seeing Cinnamon without her mother Cissy, who hasn’t been seen since. 
Lilly

Lilly is a young adult female, estimated to have been born in 2001. She is the first daughter of Lisa. Just like her mother, Lisa, Lilly is exceptionally explorative and as a juvenile, she was becoming very proficient at tool use. As a juvenile, she tried to use tools in a great variety of contexts, still learning what would work and what not. Because of this, Lilly produced up to 30 tools per day!
During her juvenile years, Lilly spent most of her time with a group of similarly aged girls, including her younger aunt Chindy. Lilly was well-liked by her peers, but she did not get along well with Ellie. Despite having many common friends, Lilly and Ellie were hardly ever seen together. Lilly and Ellie avoided each other and we think that their mutual dislike came from their time as infants, when Ellie’s mother, Friska, often chased Lilly’s mother, Lisa, away.
As a juvenile, Lilly visited her mother Lisa quite frequently, to the great pleasure of her little brother Lois, who loved to play with her. In her early juvenile years, Lilly also associated often with unflanged males, but did not seem interested in anything else but just hanging out with them. While feeding, or during nest building, Lilly was always watching her association partners closely, hoping to learn new tricks.
Around the age of 14, Lilly developed an increasing interest in males. She spent a lot of time with the locally dominant flanged males, Islo and Dian, and was also trying to mate with them. In the beginning, Islo and Dian did not seem to take Lilly very serious, probably because she was still a bit too young. But then in mid-2015 the males began showing more active interest in Lilly. Lilly would often disappear with these males for long periods of time.
In late 2016, we saw Lilly with her first infant, a boy which we named Luther. At that time, Luther was already around 6 months old. Lilly is a very protective mother and during her first year as a mother, she frequently kept Luther hidden from observers. Also, Lilly seems to have settled in the northern part of the Suaq area, where we are limited in following her. But over the last few years, we were slowly getting to follow her more and more. In terms of parenting, Lilly seems to emulate her mother Lisa because she is very gentle and patient with her infants. Lilly cuddles and grooms her baby boy a lot and he has clearly become the center of her attention.
Lilly appears fascinated by her first baby and seems to put all her energy into making sure that Luther is happy and content. Luther seems to have started to realize that he has his mother wrapped around his finger, but so far, Lilly is playing along. Through their kids, Lilly and Ellie seem to have given up on their ongoing personal feud: Luther and Eden were friends at first sight and their moms had to accept that nothing would keep those two from each other. They now allow their infants to play while they stare at each other from a far distance. We are curious to see if in the coming years Lilly and Ellie will make further steps towards each other.
All in all, Lilly has grown up to be an amazing mother and has clearly learned a lot from Lisa. We are excited to see how Lilly will raise Luther and his growing personality over the next years.
Luther

Luther was born in April 2016 and is Lilly’s first infant. Lilly is a very protective mother: during Luther’s first year of life, Lilly preferred to keep her baby boy hidden from us, which we of course respected. But lately, we are slowly getting to follow them more. Luther is now more than 3 years old and developing very well. He is very playful and his favorite activity seems to be playing with other kids, no matter how old (or young) his playmates are, what they are up to, or what their moms think of it. Luther can make everybody play because he seems to always be able to judge what his playmates might be up for most: he rough and tumble plays with the older kids and joins the younger ones in their mothers’ nests to gently play with them in there. When Luther plays, it is often difficult to see what exactly is going on because he turns into a twirling ball of fur.
As much as Luther enjoys playing with his friends, the most significant person in his life is his mother Lilly. Luther is taken care of very well by his young mother and gets caressed and groomed by her often. Luther loves to cuddle with his mom and seems to enjoy the huge amounts of affection and attention he gets from her. Lilly still likes to keep Luther close, but above all she wants him to be happy. Luther seems to have realized this: when Lilly is on the move it frequently occurs that he lets his mom wait for a long time until he decides to follow her. Interestingly, instead of leaving or grabbing her infant as other mothers often do in such situations, Lilly patiently waits for him. This usually means waiting in the most uncomfortable positions like for example in tree bridges that she holds to make it easier for Luther to cross. Luther seems very aware that he is his mother’s center of attention and we dare to say that he is probably the most spoiled infant at Suaq.
At times, Luther does push his boundaries by for example ignoring Lilly’s throat scrapes (a vocalization with which mothers call their infants) or ignoring her warnings when he is approaching less familiar association partners too closely. Luther seems so interested in other orangutans that he sometimes forgets how to behave appropriately. He has also been seen to violate orangutan behavioral codes by overstaying his welcome in the nests of other mothers or by playing with infants whom he is not supposed to.
Eden is one of the infants that is supposed to be off-limits for Luther. Eden is the infant of Ellie, the life-long foe of his mother Lilly. Their mothers’ mutual dislike stretches back into their infancy when Ellie’s mother Friska had repeatedly chased off Lilly’s mother Lisa. But despite their mother’s opposition, Luther and Eden seemed to have been friends at first sight. Their mutual affection was so strong that their mothers had no other choice but to give in. This doesn’t mean though that Ellie and Lilly started to spend time with each other. Instead, they let their infants play while they each wait at large distances from each other. When Luther was too young to go far from his mom, Eden would slowly approach Lilly to play with Luther. Lilly would make a big nest for herself to rest in and above which the infants were allowed to play safely. These days, Luther and Eden often play while their moms compete in a staring contest some 20 to 30 meters apart.
All in all, Luther is a sociable, playful, cuddly, well taken care of and at times somewhat naughty little boy.

Flanged males in Suaq

Flanged males are characterized by cheek pads around their faces as well as big throat sacks. They are much bigger, much stronger and have longer hair than unflanged males.
At Suaq, there is usually one dominant flanged male. He defends his territory against other males by long-distance calls, so called long calls. These long calls can be heard over distances of up to 1 kilometer and are usually enough to keep other flanged males away. If this is not the case, the locally dominant male will actively displace the challenging male, which sometimes includes physical fighting.
The locally dominant flanged male will take care of the females in his territory by passively offering them protection and actively warding off other males if need be. Females voluntarily associate with the locally dominant flanged male and actively seek his protection if needed.
At Suaq, Arno was the local dominant flanged male in the 90’s. When the research activities were resumed in 2007 Islo was the new, exceptionally peaceful and friendly boss. Islo was pushed from his throne in 2014 when he was repeatedly badly injured in fights with other males. Since then, the dominance hierarchy is unclear. Titan and Dian are among the most promising candidates for the position of the new dominant flanged male at Suaq.


Titan

Titan is a big flanged male who loves to shake and push over trees to make his appearance even more impressive.
We first saw Titan in 2011 when he was only passing the research area. After Islo fell from his throne in 2014, however, Titan took over the whole Northern part of the Suaq study area. Titan was well respected by the females and also did a great job in chasing away males that would bother them. The females were always a bit reluctant to get too close to Titan but would still search for his protection when needed.
Over the following two years, Titan had grown even more and became one of the biggest flanged males at Suaq.  Since 2016 Titan seemed to have retreated more and more to the North. We are not sure how far his territory reaches up there but up to date, he seems to be the undefeated ruler of the North.
These days, Titan looks older than he used to and his once-so-beautiful flanges have become a bit bumpy and saggy. However, he still occasionally visits our study area, often confidently marking his presence with multiple long calls. In 2022, when Rakus announced his claim to the Suaq area, Titan quickly came to confront him. Even though Titan took off after their interaction – which indicates his defeat – Rakus was left with a big wound in his face. We did not see the actual fight between the males, but Titan likely inflicted the wound on Rakus.
Studying Titan, especially his interactions with the local females and with the other flanged males provides us with important insight into orangutan male behavior and male-female interactions.
Islo

When research activities at Suaq were resumed in 2007, Islo was the dominant flanged male. Islo’s reign lasted for another 7 years before he fell from his throne in 2014.
Islo has always been a very gentle flanged male. He was well liked by the females and he took his role as a protector of them very serious. When being harassed by other males, the Suaq females would associate with Islo who would reliably chase away any other male.
Early 2014 we suddenly found Islo with a big flesh wound in his face. He must have lost a fight with another flanged male.
Now that Islo has lost his dominance position, he cannot protect the females against other males anymore. He is however still in the area and the new dominance hierarchy is still undecided. We are not sure yet if he will try to fight for his throne again but the fact that he often silently retreats in encounters with other males doesn’t speak for this.
The females still like to visit Islo who is after all the father of most of their younger kids. Also, the juvenile females are often seen to seek Islo’s company and Islo seems to like having them around as he is incredibly tolerant with them.
When the other flanged males are out of the area, Islo starts to behave like a dominant flanged male again: he long calls loudly and pushes over dead trees which are typical behaviors for the dominant flanged male. It seems as if he still hasn’t fully accepted his defeat yet.
Dian

Dian has been around since the early nineties when he was already fully flanged. We don’t know Dian’s exact age but he seems to be quite old.
Dian is a rather quiet and relaxed flanged male. After Islo lost his dominance position, Dian seemed to take over the Southern part of the research area. He successfully defended this area for almost two years. During this time, the females seemed to trust Dian and frequently associated with him.
The mothers of the juvenile girls would even lead their daughters towards Dian whenever those got harassed by unflanged males. Dian would then reliably chase off these males.
In late 2016 however, Dian got more and more challenged by immigrating males. At the moment it is unclear if he is still the dominant male in the South.
Rakus

Rakus is not only the dominant, flanged male in Suaq, but he also gained worldwide fame when he treated a wound under his eye with a medicinal plant. His story spread around the world, impressing many people who realized how intelligent orangutans are and how similar they can be to humans. This story highlights the importance of protecting the habitat of these fascinating animals.
When Rakus first arrived in our research area, Suaq Balimbing, in 2008, no one could have predicted that he would one day become so well-known. At that time, he was still a young, unflanged male in his adolescent years. He spent a lot of time with the young female orangutans Ellie, Shera, Chindy, and Lilly, and these friendships likely laid the foundation for his later dominance.
For many years, Rakus explored Suaq as an unflanged male, forming friendships not only with females but also with other males. Researchers spent countless hours observing him as he learned and foraged. His distinctive lightning-shaped veins under his eyes made him easy to identify.
Starting in 2021, his face began to change: it became broader, and he developed the typical throat sac of a dominant male. To assert himself in the hierarchy, he had to increasingly confront other flanged males, which also led to the aforementioned injury under his eye. However, thanks to his self-medication with the pulp of a medicinal plant, the wound has fully healed, and Rakus is in excellent health today.
For our project, Rakus is invaluable and demonstrates the importance of protecting the orangutans’ habitat. We have been accompanying him for almost 15 years now and still continue to discover new things about him. His story is like a fairy tale: from a rambunctious, subdominant male to the “King of Suaq.”
Kewin

Kewin is a medium-sized flanged male with distinctly square shaped flanges. He was first seen in Suaq in 2014. During his initial time at Suaq, he was trying to get close to the resident adult females but those didn´t seem very keen to spend time with him. For the following years, he kept on visiting the Suaq research area every couple of months but kept a rather low profile during his visits.
In 2021, we started meeting Kewin more often and he was more and more marking his presence with his melodic long calls. When Rakus started to claim the Suaq research area for himself in mid-2022, Kewin confronted him multiple times. The outcomes of these encounters usually lead to one of them taking off but rarely to a physical fight. The two of them just couldn´t seem to figure out who was dominant over the other.
Until now, Kewin has remained resident at Suaq. Him and Rakus seem to take turn in who is on site. Whenever they are present, either of them shows signs of being the dominant male through frequent long calls and extended associations with the local adult females. The local females seem to have accepted Kewin as the new (part-time) ruler and now happily spend time with him.
Studying Kewin´s behaviour, especially his multi-year raise to the top of the dominance hierarchy lead to novel insights into the career trajectories of Sumatran flanged male orangutans.


When growing up, male orangutans will leave their natal home range and move into a new area. There they will first go through a so-called unflanged stadium. This phase can last anything from a couple of years to several decades. For most of the time, unflanged males are only marginally bigger than females. Only when they are about to go through their secondary growth spurt and develop flanges they will slowly get bigger and bulkier.
At Suaq there is an exceptionally large number of unflanged males: unlike in other populations, there are much more unflanged males than flanged males. The Suaq unflanged males are also uniquely sociable and like to hang out together. We mostly find them in small groups of 2-5 males, whereby the compositions of these groups change constantly.
The Suaq unflanged males also like to hang out with females and adolescents. Since the unflanged males originally come from other areas we suspect that by spending time with resident orangutans, they will learn about the local diet and traditions.
However, unflanged males are also known to sneak copulate with the local females, which is most of the time against the females will. The unflanged males have to make sure that they are not caught by the locally dominant flanged male who will defend his females.

Gura

Gura has been seen in the Suaq research area since 2007. Gura looked very young then, so we think that he had then just left his natal area. Gura seemed to have settled at Suaq and we meet him again and again.
Even after ten years, Gura is a rather small unflanged male and seems still far away from developing flanges. This shows that some males take very long before they pass on to the flanged male stadium or may even stay unflanged for their entire life.
Gura is a very peaceful guy and loves to hang out with other unflanged males or even more with the newly independent juvenile females. But also the adult females don’t mind having him around.
Gura loves to watch what his association partners are doing. He is also known for being very playful and we see him play with the older infants quite frequently. He also sometimes tries to play with other unflanged males which is not always successful and seems to confuse some of them.


Suaq orangutan culture

The Suaq orangutans show the most sophisticated and diverse behavioral repertoires of all orangutan populations. The rise of their complex culture may have been facilitated by the high level of social tolerance of the Suaq orangutans: since they tolerate even unrelated individuals close by, immatures and adults can learn from a broader variety of conspecifics. Thus, the probability that a new discovery of an individual will be passed on to other individuals is much higher at Suaq. This ultimately allows for knowledge and new techniques to be passed on from one generation to the next.

Suaq orangutans use tools…
As a hallmark of their cultural complexity, Suaq is one of the only orangutan populations which shows habitual tool use in the foraging context. Tools are broken off, short, straight twigs of which the orangutans then often strip off the bark with their teeth and brush them at the end by chewing on them.
to get seeds out of Neesia fruits…
At the edge of the Suaq peat swamp forest, there are Neesia trees (Neesia aquatica) with fruits filled with nutritious seeds, a highly preferred food of the Suaq orangutans. These seeds are hidden inside a football-shaped, extremely hard-shelled husk and protected by a mass of razor-sharp needles inside the husk. The orangutans at Suaq insert tools into the cracks of the fruits and by moving the tool up and down inside the crack, they detach the seeds and let them drop straight into their mouths.
…. and access to insect products.
The Suaq orangutans also use tools to feed on termites, ants or the honey of bees hidden inside nests or tree holes. They carefully insert the tool into the nest or tree hole, move it back and forth, then withdraw it and lick the insects or honey off. Most of the time, the tool is held clenched between the teeth; only the largest tools, used to hammer chunks of ter­mite nests, are handled. Suaq orangutans flexibly chose the appropriate tool in terms of length, thickness and even adjust it if needed. To avoid getting stung by bees the Suaq orangutans use leafy twigs to ward them off or sometimes wrap leaves around their hands, just like gloves.
Suaq orangutans show sophisticated nest building techniques
Every evening orangutans build a nest high up in the trees to spend the night in. These nests are made of bent branches to which additional elements, such as pillows or blankets made of twigs and leaves are added. Before a rainy night, the orangutans at Suaq will add a roof on top of their nest or build their nests directly below an existing old nest to stay dry. Likewise, during their day naps, they build sunshields if they are too exposed. When being attacked by a bee swarm, the Suaq orangutans will build a nest in the leafy branches of a tree which they cover by a leafy roof. They will completely disappear in these nests to wait out the attack.
The culture of the Suaq orangutans goes beyond tool-use and complex nest building techniques and many facets of the Suaq orangutan culture still remain to be discovered.

Life History of Suaq orangutan

In the wild, orangutans are thought to live up to 60 years. However, to fully confirm this, field studies over multiple decades are needed. Orangutan mothers at Suaq give birth to their first baby around the age of 15-16 and raise their offspring mostly on their own, with no help from the father. They will nurse their babies for up to 8.5 years and have a new baby only every 7.5-9 years.

Orangutan infancy lasts 8-10 years
Young orangutans at Suaq stay with their mothers for the first 10 years.
The first 6 months, orangutan babies are constantly carried by their mothers.
Only around the age of 6-7 months they start their first attempts to leave the body of their mother, which are still mostly prevented by their watchful mothers.
From the age of about one year on, infant orangutans will often climb around in the surrounding branches while their mother is feeding in a fruit tree.
After the age of 4 years, they will travel through the canopy on their own but remain in constant close association with their mother and are still occasionally carried and nursed.


Juvenile orangutans still have to learn a lot
Around the age of 8 years, the younger sibling arrives.
Juvenile orangutans at Suaq stay with their mothers for another 1-2 years before they slowly start to separate for increasing amounts of time.
Orangutan mothers at Suaq are uniquely tolerant to their juvenile offspring and let them sleep in their night nest up to the age of 10.
Independent juveniles will spend most of their time in peer groups.
The long infant dependency provides the immature orangutans at Suaq with enough time to learn everything they need for survival.
Recent studies have shown that immature orangutans take 10-12 years until they reach competence in some of the skills they need to learn.


Suaq orangutans have many role models
Unlike immatures at other orangutan populations, immatures at Suaq not just have the opportunity to learn from their mothers but also from other individuals.
Mothers at Suaq often associate with other females and their offspring which gives their offspring the opportunity to interact with peers.
Likewise, juvenile individuals and adult males are among the mothers’ regular association partners.
With our current behavioral studies we are trying to find out how the difference in opportunities for social learning affects the development of the Suaq immatures.

Life History of Suaq orangutan

In the wild, orangutans are thought to live up to 60 years. However, to fully confirm this, field studies over multiple decades are needed. Orangutan mothers at Suaq give birth to their first baby around the age of 15-16 and raise their offspring mostly on their own, with no help from the father. They will nurse their babies for up to 8.5 years and have a new baby only every 7.5-9 years.

Orangutan infancy lasts 8-10 years
Young orangutans at Suaq stay with their mothers for the first 10 years.
The first 6 months, orangutan babies are constantly carried by their mothers.
Only around the age of 6-7 months they start their first attempts to leave the body of their mother, which are still mostly prevented by their watchful mothers.
From the age of about one year on, infant orangutans will often climb around in the surrounding branches while their mother is feeding in a fruit tree.
After the age of 4 years, they will travel through the canopy on their own but remain in constant close association with their mother and are still occasionally carried and nursed.


Juvenile orangutans still have to learn a lot
Around the age of 8 years, the younger sibling arrives.
Juvenile orangutans at Suaq stay with their mothers for another 1-2 years before they slowly start to separate for increasing amounts of time.
Orangutan mothers at Suaq are uniquely tolerant to their juvenile offspring and let them sleep in their night nest up to the age of 10.
Independent juveniles will spend most of their time in peer groups.
The long infant dependency provides the immature orangutans at Suaq with enough time to learn everything they need for survival.
Recent studies have shown that immature orangutans take 10-12 years until they reach competence in some of the skills they need to learn.


Suaq orangutans have many role models
Unlike immatures at other orangutan populations, immatures at Suaq not just have the opportunity to learn from their mothers but also from other individuals.
Mothers at Suaq often associate with other females and their offspring which gives their offspring the opportunity to interact with peers.
Likewise, juvenile individuals and adult males are among the mothers’ regular association partners.
With our current behavioral studies we are trying to find out how the difference in opportunities for social learning affects the development of the Suaq immatures.





Sumatran orangutan
The Sumatran orangutan (Pongo abelii) is one of the three species of orangutans. Critically endangered, and found only in the north of the Indonesian island of Sumatra, it is rarer than the Bornean orangutan but more common than the recently identified Tapanuli orangutan, also found in Sumatra. Its common name is based on two separate local words, orang 'people; person' and hutan 'forest', derived from Malay, and translates as 'person of the forest'.
Description
Male Sumatran orangutans grow to about 1.7 m (5.6 ft) tall and 90 kg (200 lb), while females are smaller, averaging 90 cm (3.0 ft) and 45 kg (99 lb). Compared to the Bornean species, Sumatran orangutans are thinner and have longer faces; their hair is longer and has a paler red color.
Evolution
Fossil orangutans in Sumatra from the Pleistocene had similar diets to present-day Sumatran orangutans, consisting mainly of soft fruit as evidenced by dental microwear.
Behaviour and ecology
Compared with the Bornean orangutan, the Sumatran orangutan tends to be more frugivorous and especially insectivorous. Preferred fruits include figs and jackfruits. It will also eat bird eggs and small vertebrates. Sumatran orangutans spend far less time feeding on the inner bark of trees.
Wild Sumatran orangutans in the Suaq Balimbing swamp have been observed using tools. An orangutan will break off a tree branch that is about a foot long, snap off the twigs and fray one end with its teeth. The orangutan will use the stick to dig in tree holes for termites. They will also use the stick to poke a bee's nest wall, move it around and catch the honey. In addition, orangutans use tools to eat fruit. When the fruit of the Neesia tree ripens, its hard, ridged husk softens until it falls open. Inside are seeds that the orangutans enjoy eating, but they are surrounded by fiberglass-like hairs that are painful if eaten. Tools are created differently for different uses. Sticks are often made longer or shorter depending on whether they will be used for insects or fruits. If a particular tool proves useful, the orangutan will often save it. Over time, they will collect entire "toolboxes". A Neesia-eating orangutan will select a five-inch stick, strip off its bark, and then carefully collect the hairs with it. Once the fruit is safe, the ape will eat the seeds using the stick or its fingers. Although similar swamps can be found in Borneo, wild Bornean orangutans have not been seen using these types of tools.
As well as being used as tools, tree branches are a means of transportation for the Sumatran orangutan. The orangutans are the heaviest mammals to travel by tree, which makes them particularly susceptible to the changes in arboreal compliance. To deal with this, their locomotion is characterized by slow movement, long contact times, and an impressively large array of locomotory postures. Orangutans have even been shown to utilize the compliance in vertical supports to lower the cost of locomotion by swaying trees back and forth and they possess unique strategies of locomotion, moving slowly and using multiple supports to limit oscillations in compliant branches, particularly at their tips.
The Sumatran orangutan is also more arboreal than its Bornean cousin; this could be because of the presence of large predators, like the Sumatran tiger. It moves through the trees by quadrumanous locomotion and semibrachiation.
As of 2017, the Sumatran orangutan species only has approximately 13,846 remaining members in its population. The World Wide Fund for Nature is thus carrying out attempts to protect the species by allowing them to reproduce in the safe environment of captivity. However, this comes at a risk to the Sumatran orangutan's native behaviors in the wild. While in captivity, the orangutans are at risk to the "Captivity Effect": animals held in captivity for a prolonged period will no longer know how to behave naturally in the wild. Being provided with water, food, and shelter while in captivity and lacking all the challenges of living in the wild, captive behavior becomes more exploratory in nature.
A repertoire of 64 different gestures in use by orangutans has been identified, 29 of which are thought to have a specific meaning that can be interpreted by other orangutans the majority of the time. Six intentional meanings were identified: Affiliate/Play, Stop action, Look at/Take object, Share food/object, Co-locomote and Move away. Sumatran orangutans do not use sounds as part of their communication, which includes a lack of audible danger signals, but rather base their communication on gestures alone.
In 2024, a wild Sumatran orangutan, called Rakus, was observed applying a paste made from chewed Fibraurea tinctoria leaves to a facial wound, a treatment which appeared to heal the wound weeks later.
Life cycle
The Sumatran orangutan has five stages of life that are characterized by different physical and behavioral features. The first of these stages is infancy, which lasts from birth to around 2.5 years of age. The orangutan weighs between 2 and 6 kilograms. An infant is identified by light pigmented zones around the eyes and muzzle in contrast to darker pigmentation on the rest of the face as well as long hairs that protrude outward around the face. During this time, the infant is always carried by the mother during travel, it is highly dependent on the mother for food, and also sleeps in the mother's nest.
The next stage is called juvenilehood and takes place between 2.5 and 5 years of age. The orangutan weighs between 6 and 15 kilograms, and does not look dramatically different from an infant. Although it is still mainly carried by the mother, a juvenile will often play with peers and make small exploratory trips within the vision of the mother. Towards the end of this stage, the orangutan will stop sleeping in the mother's nest and will build its own nest nearby.
From the ages of 5 to 8 years of age, the orangutan is in an adolescent stage of life. The orangutan weighs around 15–30 kilograms. The light patches on the face start to disappear, and eventually the face becomes completely dark. During this time, orangutans still have constant contact with their mothers, yet they develop a stronger relationship with peers while playing in groups. They are still young and act with caution around unfamiliar adults, especially males.
At 8 years of age, female orangutans are considered fully developed and begin to have offspring of their own. Males, however, enter a stage called sub-adulthood. This stage lasts from 8 to around 13 or 15 years of age, and the orangutans weigh around 30 to 50 kilograms. Their faces are completely dark, and they begin to develop cheek flanges. Their beard starts to emerge, while the hair around their face shortens, and instead of pointing outwards, the face flattens along the skull. This stage marks sexual maturity in males, yet these orangutans are still socially undeveloped and will still avoid contact with adult males.
Finally, male Sumatran orangutans reach adulthood at 13 to 15 years of age. They are extremely large animals, weighing between 50 and 90 kilograms, roughly the weight of a fully grown human. They have a fully grown beard, fully developed cheek callosities, and long hair. These orangutans have reached full sexual and social maturity and now only travel alone.
Female Sumatran orangutans typically live 44–53 years in the wild, while males have a slightly longer lifespan of 47–58 years. Females are able to give birth up to 53 years of age, based on studies of menopausal cycles. Both males and females are usually considered healthy even at the end of their lifespans and can be identified as such by the regular abundance of hair growth and robust cheek pads.
The Sumatran orangutan is more social than its Bornean counterpart; groups gather to feed on the mass amounts of fruit on fig trees. The Sumatran orangutan community is best described as loose, not showing social or spatial exclusivity. Groups generally consist of female clusters and a preferred male mate. However, adult males generally avoid contact with other adult males. Subadult males will try to mate with any female, although mostly unsuccessfully, since mature females are easily capable of fending them off. Mature females prefer to mate with mature males. Usually, there is a specific male in a group that mature females will exhibit preference for.
Male Sumatran orangutans sometimes have a delay of many years in the development of secondary sexual characteristics, such as cheek flanges and muscle mass. Males exhibit bimaturism, whereby fully flanged adult males and the smaller unflanged males are both capable of reproducing, but employ differing mating strategies to do so.
The average interbirth rates for the Sumatran orangutan is 9.3 years, the longest reported among the great apes, including the Bornean orangutan. Infant orangutans will stay close to their mothers for up to three years. Even after that, the young will still associate with their mothers. Both the Sumatran and Bornean orangutans are likely to live several decades; estimated longevity is more than 50 years. The average age of the first reproduction of male P. abelii is around 15.4 years old. There is no indication of menopause.
Nonja, thought to be the world's oldest orangutan in captivity or the wild at the time of her death, died at the Miami MetroZoo at the age of 55. Puan, an orangutan at Perth Zoo, is believed to have been 62 years old at the time of her death, making her the oldest recorded orangutan. The current oldest orangutan in the world is believed to be Bella, a female orangutan at the Hagenbeck Zoo, who is 61 years of age.
Diet
Sumatran orangutans are primarily frugivores, favoring fruits consisting of a large seed and surrounded by a fleshy substance, such as durians, lychees, jackfruit, breadfruit, and fig fruits. Insects are also a huge part of the orangutan's diet; the most consumed types are ants, predominantly of the genus Camponotus (at least four species indet.). Their main diet can be broken up into five categories: fruits, insects, leaf material, bark and other miscellaneous food items. Studies have shown that orangutans in the Ketambe area in Indonesia ate over 92 different kinds of fruit, 13 different kinds of leaves, 22 sorts of other vegetable material such as top-sprouts, and pseudo-bulbs of orchids. Insects included in the diet are numbered at least 17 different types. Occasionally soil from termite mounds were ingested in small quantities. When there is low ripe fruit availability, Sumatran orangutans will eat the meat of the slow loris, a nocturnal primate. Water consumption for the orangutans was ingested from natural bowls created in the trees they lived around. They even drank water from the hair on their arms when rainfall was heavy.

Meat-eating
Meat-eating happens rarely in Sumatran orangutan, and orangutans do not show a male bias in meat-eating. Research in the Ketambe area reported cases of meat-eating in wild Sumatran orangutans, of which nine cases were of orangutans eating slow lorises. The research shows, in the most recent three cases of slow lorises eaten by Sumatran orangutan, a maximum mean feeding rate of the adult orangutan for an entire adult male slow loris is 160.9 g/h and, of the infant, 142.4 g/h. No cases have been reported during mast years, which suggests orangutans take meat as a fallback for the seasonal shortage of fruits; preying on slow loris occurs more often in periods of low fruit availability. Similar to most primate species, orangutans appear to only share meat between mother and infants.

Genomics
Orangutans have 48 chromosomes. The Sumatran orangutan genome was sequenced in January 2011, based on a captive female named Susie. Following humans and chimpanzees, the Sumatran orangutan has become the third extant hominid species to have its genome sequenced.
The researchers also published less complete copies from ten wild orangutans, five from Borneo and five from Sumatra. The genetic diversity was found to be lower in Bornean orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus) than in Sumatran ones (Pongo abelii), despite the fact that Borneo is home to six or seven times as many orangutans as Sumatra. The comparison has shown these two species diverged around 400,000 years ago, more recently than was previously thought. The orangutan genome also has fewer rearrangements than the chimpanzee/human lineage.
Conservation
Threats
Sumatran orangutans encounter threats such as logging (both legal and illegal), wholesale conversion of forest to agricultural land and oil palm plantations, and fragmentation by roads. Oil companies use a method of deforestation to re-use land for palm oil. This land is taken from the forest in which Sumatran orangutans live. An assessment of forest loss in the 1990s concluded that forests supporting at least 1,000 orangutans were lost each year within the Leuser Ecosystem alone.
As of 2017, approximately 82.5% of the Sumatran orangutan population was strictly confined to the northernmost tip of the island, in the Aceh Province. Orangutans are rarely, if ever, found south of the Simpang Kanan River on Sumatra's west side or south of the Asahan River on the east side. The Pakpak Barat population in particular is the only Sumatran population predicted to be able to sustain orangutans in the long run, given the current effects of habitat displacement and human impact.
While poaching generally is not a huge problem for the Sumatrans, occasional local hunting does decrease the population size. They have been hunted in Northern Sumatra in the past as targets for food; although deliberate attempts to hunt the Sumatrans are rare nowadays, locals such as the Batak people are known to eat almost all vertebrates in their area. Additionally, the Sumatrans are treated as pests by Sumatran farmers, becoming targets of elimination if they are seen damaging or stealing crops. For commercial aspects, hunts for both dead or live specimens have also been recorded as an effect of the demand by European and North American zoos and institutions throughout the 20th century.
Sumatran orangutans have developed a highly functioning cardiovascular system. However, with this development of hugely improved air sacs in their lungs, air sacculitis has become more prevalent among orangutans in this species. Air sacculitis is similar to streptococcal infection, such as strep throat in humans. The bacterial infection is becoming increasingly common in captive orangutans, due to the fact that they are exposed to the human strain of Streptococcus in captivity. At first, both strains are treated and cured with antibiotics along with rest. Yet, in 2014, a Sumatran orangutan, ten years in captivity, was the first of its species to die from Streptococcus anginosus. This remains the only known case, but raises the question of why the known human cure for Streptococcus was ineffective in this case.
Conservation status
The Sumatran orangutan is endemic to the north of Sumatra. In the wild, Sumatran orangutans only survive in the province of Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam (NAD), the northernmost tip of the island. The primate was once more widespread, as they were found farther to the south in the 19th century, such as in Jambi and Padang. There are small populations in the North Sumatra province along the border with NAD, particularly in the Lake Toba forests. A survey in the Lake Toba region found only two inhabited areas, Bukit Lawang (defined as the animal sanctuary) and Gunung Leuser National Park. Bukit Lawang is a jungle village, 90 kilometers northwest of Medan, situated at the eastern side of Gunung Leuser National Park. An orangutan sanctuary was set up here by a Swiss organization in the 1970s to attempt to rehabilitate orangutans captured from the logging industry. The rangers were trained to teach the orangutans vital jungle skills to enable them to reintegrate into the forest and provided additional supplementary food from a feeding platform. However, within the last few years, supplementary feeding has ceased as the orangutan rehabilitation program has been deemed a success, the orangutans having been fully rehabilitated, and the jungle is now at saturation point, so the sanctuary no longer accepts new orphaned orangutans.
The species has been assessed as critically endangered on the IUCN Red List since 2000. From 2000–2008 it was considered one of "The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates."
A survey published in March 2016 estimates a population of 14,613 Sumatran orangutans in the wild, doubling previous population estimates. A survey in 2004 estimated that around 7,300 Sumatran orangutans still live in the wild. The same study estimates a 20,552-square-kilometer occupied area for the Sumatran orangutans, of which only an approximate area range of 8,992 km² harbors permanent populations. Some of them are being protected in five areas in Gunung Leuser National Park; others live in unprotected areas: northwest and northeast Aceh block, West Batang Toru river, East Sarulla, and Sidiangkat. A successful breeding program has been established in Bukit Tiga Puluh National Park in Jambi and Riau provinces.
Two strategies that are recently being considered to conserve this species are 1) rehabilitation and reintroduction of ex-captive or displaced individuals and 2) the protection of their forest habitat by preventing threats such as deforestation and hunting. The former was determined to be more cost-efficient for maintaining the wild orangutan populations, but comes with a longer time scale of 10–20 years. The latter approach has better prospects for ensuring long-term stability of populations. This type of habitat conservation approach has been pursued by the World Wide Fund for Nature, which joined forces with several other organizations to stop the clearing of the biggest part of remaining natural forest close to the Bukit Tigapuluh National Park.
In addition to the above extant wild populations, a new population is being established in the Bukit Tigapuluh National Park (Jambi and Riau Provinces) via the re-introduction of confiscated illegal pets. This population currently numbers around 70 individuals and is reproducing. However, it has been concluded that forest conservation costs twelve times less than reintroducing orangutans into the wild, and conserves more biological diversity.
Orangutans have large home ranges and low population densities, which complicates conservation efforts. Population densities depend to a large degree on the abundance of fruits with soft pulp. Sumatran orangutans will commute seasonally between lowland, intermediate, and highland regions, following fruit availability. Undisturbed forests with broader altitudinal range can thus sustain larger orangutan populations; conversely, the fragmentation and extensive clearance of forest ranges breaks up this seasonal movement. Sumatra currently has one of the highest deforestation rates in the world.



Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra
The Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra site was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2004. It comprises three Indonesian national parks on the island of Sumatra: Gunung Leuser National Park, Kerinci Seblat National Park, and the Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park. The site is listed under Criteria vii - outstanding scenic beauty; ix - an outstanding example representing significant on-going ecological and biological processes; and x - contains the most important and significant natural habitats for in-situ conservation. The Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra has been placed on the Danger List since 2011 to help overcome threats posed by poaching, illegal logging, agricultural encroachment, and plans to build roads through the site.
Location and size
The Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra consists of three national parks: Gunung Leuser National Park (GLNP) (8,629.75 km²), Kerinci Seblat National Park (KSNP) (13,753.5 km²), and Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park (BBSNP) (3,568 km²). The total area of the rainforest is 25,000 km². The Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Sumatra was chosen because, first, it represents a significant area of forests on the island of Sumatra, because of the biodiversity of lowland and mountain forests. This once vast island of tropical rainforest has been condensed to secluded areas in the space of 50 years.
Second, the national parks that make up the heritage are all located on the well-known key spine of the Bukit Barisan Mountains, known as the ‘Andes of Sumatra’, and that all around it there are magnificent views. The mountains of each site represent important mountainous backdrops to the established and developed lowlands of Sumatra. The mixture of the stunning Lake Gunung Tujuh (the highest lake in Southeast Asia), the splendour of the giant Mount Kerinci volcano, many small volcanic, coastal and glacial lakes in natural forested settings. This shows the beauty of the Tropical Rainforest Heritage of Bukit Sumatra.
Lastly, all three national parks have a very varied habitat and have outstanding biodiversity. Altogether the three sites make up 50% of the total plant variety in Sumatra. At least 92 local common species have been recognized in GLNP. The nomination contains populations of both the world’s largest flower (Rafflesia arnoldi) and the tallest flower (Amorphophallus titanum). The Tropical Rainforest of Sumatra has just recently become a part of the World Heritage List, in 2004. 2.5 million hectares of Sumatra’s rainforests were included on the World Heritage List of the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) because of their rich and different biodiversity.
Geography and climate
Gunung Leuser National Park in the north of the island is 150 km long, over 100 km wide, and is mostly mountainous. 40% of the park is steep, and over 1,500 m. 12% of the park only, in the lower southern half, is below 600 meters but for 25 km runs down the coast. Eleven peaks are over 2,700 m, and the highest point is Gunung Leuser, reaching 3,466 meters. The area surrounding Gunung Leuser is known as the Leuser Ecosystem.
Kerinci Seblat National Park in the center extends 350 km down the back of the Bukit Barisan, averaging 45 km width and 2,000 m above sea level. The northern half has a lower eastern mountain range, between 800–1,500 m. Three-quarters of the park is steep. The highest point, and highest volcano in Indonesia, is Mount Kerinci, standing at 3,805 m.
Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park is also 350 km long but only 45 km wide on average. The northern two-thirds are rocky, averaging 1,500 m with the highest point, Mount Pulung, standing at 1,964 m. The southern half is lower; 90 km of it is a cape, and the park borders the sea for half its length. Many rivers derive in the parks, and there are several lakes and hot springs.
The mountains have year-round little changing high temperatures, high humidity, and high rainfall for 9 months in wetter areas, 7 months in drier areas. This climate has encouraged the high speciation (formation of new species) and variety of species. Gunung Leuser receives 3,000 mm of rainfall in the north and collects 4,657 mm in the lowland south. Temperatures average between 21°C to 28°C, and the humidity is always above 60%, especially when over 1,700 m. In Kerinci Seblat, the rainfall averages 2,990 mm, temperatures range from 16°C to 28°C, and humidity is always high (77-90%). In Bukit Barisan Selatan, the rocky west is wet, especially during the November to May monsoon: rainfall is 3,000–4,000 mm. The east is drier, with 2,500–3,000 mm of rainfall and temperatures ranging between 20°C and 28°C.
Flora and fauna
Gunung Leuser National Park (GLNP) is a part of the 18 Indonesian regions classified by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) among the 200 global ecoregions of importance for the preservation of the world’s biodiversity. 174 mammals are recorded, 3 being endemic, and 21 listed as threatened in 2000. Little is known about the smaller mammals. 380 species of birds are listed, 13 being endemic and 52 threatened. Some of the important species include the orangutan, Sumatran rhinoceros, and the pigtailed monkey. Important plants include Rafflesia arnoldi and Amorphophallus titanum. Several important bird species include Rueck's blue-flycatcher and the white-winged wood duck.
In Kerinci Seblat National Park (KSNP), 85 mammal species are recorded, 5 endemic, and 23 listed as threatened. 370 species of birds are listed, 13 being endemic and 58 threatened. Some important mammal species include the Bornean clouded leopard, Asian tapir, and Sumatran rhino. The population of Sumatran tigers in Kerinci Seblat National Park is the highest recorded, making it one of the 12 Globally Important Tiger Conservation Landscapes. Several important bird species include the white-winged wood duck and the Sumatran ground-cuckoo. A few important plant species include Hopea beccariana and Shorea ovalis ssp. seicea.
Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park (BBSNP) has 98 mammals recorded, with 1 endemic and 25 threatened. 379 species of birds are listed, 7 being endemic and 58 threatened. 59 reptile and amphibian species are recorded. BBSNP has the same bird species as KSNP. Some important mammal species include the Sumatran elephant.




